There is a very compelling case for investing in Africa right now, with the continent being home to a majority of the world s fastest growing economies, albeit from a low base. Nevertheless, there remains a sense of apprehension, from South Africa, towards doing business on the continent.Moneyweb held an Into Africa roundtable discussion sponsored by Standard Bank this week, to get a sense of what the biggest stumbling blocks were in venturing into Africa. Speaking at the roundtable were Raoul Gamsu, the CEO of Consolidated Infrastructure Group (CIG), and Onelogix CEO Ian Lourens. Both companies have an extensive presence on the continent, with the former in 21 countries across Africa and the Middle East, diversified in power, building materials, oil &amp; gas, and rail sectors. The latter is a specialist logistics provider, also with a large African footprint, particularly in southern and eastern Africa.Be boldIn 2009 CIG went from spending zero on business development, to investing R15 million to improve its presence and get exposure in more countries. It then slowly began taking over smaller companies in other countries.Said Gamsu: You can imagine the consternation at the time &#8211; whether or not it was the right move . Right now we ve got an order-book outside South Africa of about $100 million. And looking at our experience, between 2008 and now, we ve increased our revenue between eight and ten-fold. So you certainly say [that] there has been a good return on those investments. Use local people and have a local presenceBoth Gamsu and Lourens highlighted the importance of using local people wherever possible. Not only because they have local knowledge of the culture and country-specific nuances that only a local would understand, but because other countries&#8217; governments are looking to create employment and opportunities for their citizens. We use Zimbabwean drivers In Zimbabwe, Mozambican drivers in Mozambique, and so on. And if someone stops the driver, for example, they know how to play the game, said Lourens. We don t bribe, but if somebody says, you re exceeding your height, and the fine is $800 , our guys know that it s not that, it s $20-$25. Gamsu said that he doesn t believe they could navigate any of the countries outside South Africa, without a good strong local presence, whether that involves relocating their own people to those countries or partnering up with credible business in those regions.Don t cut corners on the contractsWhen it comes to contracts it s important to cover all your bases because one small thing, like not specifying what currency you will be paid in, can have a dire impact on your bottom line.Don t be arrogant and don t be inflexibleBoth speakers intimated that one of the worst things you could do when going into Africa is being rigid in your approach. Every region/country is not homogenous and it is important to be malleable and observant so as to be able to adapt to every environment. This also ties in with the last point of using local people and local networks that can provide insight into how things are done in that jurisdiction.Said Gamsu: Bureaucracy is a big challenge. For example, in Angola, it once took two-and-a-half years to get an approval on an investment project. We had done the transaction but time just went by until we could close it out . I can see why many companies would get burned in those situations. Similarly, Lourens says it s not unusual to have to spend one-and-a-half to four days waiting at the Beitbridge border post for a load to be processed. But we have about 20 years experience so a load meant to go over next week is probably being processed there right now, said Lourens.Start small and deliverYou ll always be judged on your track record so you must always deliver a first-class product, said Gamsu. No matter how insignificant you think a project might be in comparison with the rest of your portfolio, he says that all the work your company does is a benchmark. So, you start small and you build up your name over time and you ve got to get your first draft right. If you look at areas where we have taken market share from existing players, it s where they have under-delivered, and we have over-delivered, said Gamsu.This article is part of a series sponsored by Standard Bank Business Banking . Should you require further information about doing business in the rest of the continent please e-mail Moneyweb MD Marc Ashton with details of your project and he will connect you with an appropriate banking resource.